[Amit Varma]: A few nights ago I had a bad dream. I was lying in an operation theatre undergoing surgery.
[Amit Varma]: I was having a toenail removed. I was fully conscious and for some reason the doctor had
[Amit Varma]: cut open my torso and was bent over it in deep concentration. After some time he pulled
[Amit Varma]: out my kidney and held it up proudly. Here's your toenail, he said. I managed to find it.
[Amit Varma]: That's not my toenail, I shouted at him. It's my bloody kidney. I mean it's literally my
[Amit Varma]: bloody kidney. What have you done? Have you studied medicine? He looked at me and gave
[Amit Varma]: me a wild smile. Actually, he said, I don't exist. I'm just a creature in your dream.
[Amit Varma]: But doctors like me could be reality if not for the Medical Council of India. Everyone
[Amit Varma]: in India should be glad they exist. Because if they did not, I would. And then he gave
[Amit Varma]: an evil laugh as in front of my eyes, my kidney turned into a toenail.
[Unknown]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Verma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to the scene and the unseen, my weekly podcast where I examine the intended effects
[Amit Varma]: and the unintended effects of public policy. Today, I'm going to talk about the Medical
[Amit Varma]: Council of India, which is a statutory body that oversees medical education in India.
[Amit Varma]: What do they do? To quote from Wikipedia, the council grants recognition of medical
[Amit Varma]: qualifications, gives accreditation to medical schools, grants registration to medical practitioners
[Amit Varma]: and monitors medical practice in India. What is the scene effect of this?
[Amit Varma]: The scene effect of the Medical Council of India is that it sets high standards for medical
[Amit Varma]: education in India. That sounds like a healthy effect. But what are the unseen effects of
[Amit Varma]: such regulation? To discuss that, I've brought Pawan Srinath onto the show. Pawan is a fellow
[Amit Varma]: at the Takshashila Institution in Bangalore.
[Amit Varma]: Pawan, so it sounds intuitive to me that the Medical Council of India should, after all,
[Amit Varma]: regulate medical education because they are doctors. They're in the best place to make
[Amit Varma]: those decisions. What do you feel about it?
[Guest]: So yes, on the offset, it feels like it's better that you have qualified doctors rather
[Guest]: than appointed bureaucrats manage medical education. The problem is one of professional
[Guest]: competition. We all know that we have a limited number of doctors in the country and basically
[Guest]: medical education allows for new doctors to come in, you know, younger folk who are probably
[Guest]: better trained, who probably have a bit more modern outlook. They have the latest research
[Guest]: and these guys will start providing competition for the incumbents.
[Guest]: So if you are regulating competition to yourself, will you be honest? Not really. And remember
[Guest]: that the Medical Council of India is not just a board of some sort, but it's sort of an
[Guest]: elected body. It has membership. So presidents get elected. So there is a politics inside
[Guest]: the Medical Council of India, which wants a lack of competition.
[Amit Varma]: They have their own incentives.
[Guest]: Yeah. So the incentives get perverse. So I do think that the Medical Council of India
[Guest]: should have a role in intervening in medical education, but that should be to set standards,
[Guest]: to do stuff like that, rather than be a gatekeeper for how many new colleges can be opened and
[Amit Varma]: how many new people can come in.
[Guest]: So what are the unseen effects of this regulation?
[Guest]: So the first unseen effect, which is seen in a certain way, is scarcity. So let me give
[Guest]: you a few numbers. There's a rough estimate that we have about 600 to 700,000 doctors
[Guest]: in the country who are practicing right now, who are qualified and trained and have a proper
[Guest]: degree. And to this, we are now adding about 45,000 odd doctors every year who are graduating.
[Guest]: And of this, the postgraduate numbers and the super specialization numbers are way smaller.
[Guest]: We're talking 5,000 to 10,000 from within the country, a few more from outside. So that's
[Guest]: very tiny a number. That's half a doctor for 1,000 people in the population. WHO says,
[Guest]: you know, by and large, you're better off if you have about two and a half, three doctors.
[Guest]: And the thing is, this scarcity is misattributed. We say that, oh, this is because we are a
[Guest]: poor country. That's the standard. So many things are wrong because we are a poor country.
[Guest]: But no, even as a poor country, we are producing far more engineers. And I would argue, increasingly
[Guest]: better quality engineers over the last two decades. Right. So the situation that it was
[Guest]: in, say, 1990 to now is fundamentally different. Whereas in medical education, maybe in 1990
[Guest]: or 2000, you would have, say, 25,000 doctors or 20,000 doctors coming out. Now it's 45.
[Guest]: Right. So the scarcity is acute. And again, various folk devils get created where, who
[Guest]: are to blame for this shortage, right? Oh, doctors don't care for the country. They go
[Guest]: abroad and they pursue sort of personal interest, but don't do anything for the nation. So all
[Guest]: these sort of tropes come about from this idea of scarcity. That's the first unseen
[Guest]: effect. The second one is the immense cost of medical education, which we seem to have
[Guest]: taken for granted. Right. There are two parts to this. One is we know that private medical
[Guest]: education is extremely expensive. And we just think that, yeah, this, because they have
[Guest]: to do so much lab work, so much clinical work, it just costs so much. But that's simply not
[Guest]: true. It's because the moment you restrict supply and demand is immense, prices go through
[Guest]: the roof, either legally or illegally. Right. And then the knock on effect of that is you
[Guest]: say, oh, therefore, you need state subsidization of medical education. Right. So state should,
[Guest]: so you need an AIMS in every state and, you know, just like we had, we wanted an IIT in
[Guest]: every state. So you have the old trope sort of continuing. Right. And then what happens
[Guest]: is there is perverse incentives for doctors who enter the system as well. There is a desperate
[Guest]: need to super specialize so that you can sort of recover all this investment you've put
[Guest]: in. Right. So remember, it's not just cost. Right. So probably doctors who go to private
[Guest]: medical colleges between their MEBS and their post graduation spend maybe 50 lakhs, a crore,
[Guest]: and not just that, but what, eight years of their time, 10 years of their time studying
[Guest]: for all those exams and so on. So now you're 30 or 28, and now's the chance for you to
[Guest]: start earning and you have to recover this. Right. And you want to. And then we say that
[Guest]: medical costs are through the roof. Right. So that's the knock on effect that happens.
[Guest]: Even beyond that, what happens is because this, the gate is so restricted, even the
[Guest]: private players who get in, with a few salient exceptions, are slightly dodgy players. Right.
[Guest]: So the people who know how to get in, because they know the right people, they know how
[Guest]: to make the right connections and so on. Right. So do they not have an incentive to deliver
[Guest]: quality education, but you have adverse selection where the best possible players in the market
[Guest]: sort of leave. And I don't even want to go into the lack of FDI and education, the lack
[Guest]: of foreign competition, all of that. Right. We still don't have that in other branches
[Guest]: of higher education, but I would argue that the sectors are doing much better than how
[Guest]: medical education is doing. So what you have is bad private players coming in and then
[Guest]: private players in general getting a bad name, the old idea of, you know, private enterprise
[Guest]: being evil in India. So the trope sort of continues. So it's a larger sort of, I would
[Guest]: argue, a moral decay in society and sort of a misalignment of what is good and what is
[Guest]: bad. Right. Which, which seems far fetched when I sort of draw this, it's like a third
[Guest]: order effect, but I think it's really important.
[Amit Varma]: And would I be correct in saying that a knock-on effect of the scarcity, which you alluded
[Amit Varma]: to as a first effect, also then has an impact on healthcare costs, because there are less
[Amit Varma]: doctors, healthcare costs are way higher for the consumers, for the patients. And then
[Amit Varma]: this is blamed on private greed and so on. Exactly. Right. Or either private greed or
[Amit Varma]: graft. Right. Those are the two. So the government essentially doesn't allow a free market to
[Amit Varma]: operate. And the effect of restricting the supply is that prices go through the roof,
[Amit Varma]: there is scarcity, healthcare prices also go through the roof, and all of it is used
[Amit Varma]: by the government to say that, hey, look, the private free markets aren't working when
[Guest]: there weren't free markets.
[Guest]: And therefore, we need a National Health Service, we need nationalizing this. So, and the other
[Guest]: problem that happens is, again, more folk devils are, oh, look at the United States,
[Guest]: look how messed up their system is. That's like talking about obesity to a malnourished
[Guest]: person. It doesn't make sense. I mean, this person's not getting enough food. We don't
[Guest]: have enough doctors. So they have sort of a postmortem problem, right? Or a first world
[Guest]: problem. Our problems are entirely different. So healthcare costs go through the roof. And
[Guest]: then what happens is quacks, charlatans, alternative medicine and pill peddlers step in to fill
[Guest]: the vacuum because people desperately need solutions for their medical problems. And
[Guest]: people are seeing that elsewhere in the world, sort of different diseases are getting tackled.
[Guest]: And one of the things is no matter what income level you're in, if there's a cure, you will
[Guest]: do whatever it takes to get your family member the cure, right? So, this is there at all
[Guest]: levels, right? At one, you would have seen if you ever go to a medical store, you'll
[Guest]: have people who come up and say, hey, I have a fever, what should I take? And the medical
[Guest]: store clerk is dispensing medical advice. While we are loftily saying we want high standards
[Guest]: for doctors, we're having a medical store clerk giving medical advice, right? That's
[Guest]: patently ridiculous. I mean, at the other end, you have people who say, doctor, and
[Guest]: then start practicing and, you know, start giving pills, start giving injections. The
[Guest]: placebo effect is a real thing. So, you feel like this doctor has given you a dramatic
[Amit Varma]: intervention.
[Amit Varma]: Plus, we have a ministry of Ayush with homeopathy.
[Guest]: Let's not even go there. But so, you have quacks of all types who get in. And yeah,
[Guest]: you have Ayurveda, you have, I don't have a problem with Ayurveda, per se, but it desperately
[Guest]: needs to be modernized. And you have actual sort of quackery, which is homeopathy, Reiki,
[Guest]: and all kinds of things that sort of fill up this vacuum that is there. And I'll give
[Guest]: you one example of how weird this becomes. In 2014, there was this announcement that
[Guest]: homeopathy and Ayurvedic practitioners can now start performing abortions. And this was
[Guest]: done in the name of promoting sort of, you know, women's rights, you know, safety, and
[Guest]: so on. Why? Because you don't have enough OBGYNs and doctors who can perform abortions.
[Guest]: And it's ridiculous. I mean, homeopathy, by the way, does not believe in surgery either.
[Guest]: So there are multiple levels of cognitive dissonance that is happening over here. But
[Guest]: those are the kinds of weird solutions that people come up with. And I would say the final
[Guest]: thing, the biggest sort of unseen effect that happens is, frankly, a curb on personal freedom.
[Guest]: Right? We are saying, oh, you got a medical degree, now go spend a year and a half in
[Guest]: a rural area. Or you do this, only if you clear conditions A, B and C, will I allow
[Guest]: you to go abroad to practice medicine abroad.
[Amit Varma]: Are there conditions like this?
[Guest]: They're trying desperately to put it in. The good news is state capacity is a little limited.
[Guest]: So they can't enforce some of the more draconian things. And as we have seen with any draconian
[Guest]: rules, people find work around it. So what you see is just skewed decisions, people doing
[Guest]: weird things to get around weird rules. And in general, you have a lack of freedom. I
[Guest]: mean, so the reality is, if we didn't restrict supply, if instead of 45,000 doctors a year,
[Guest]: we had 200,000, 500,000 doctors.
[Amit Varma]: Or whatever the market can take.
[Guest]: And the reality is, India has been providing labor to the world. So it's not doctors in
[Guest]: the US versus doctors in rural India. If we start supplying enough doctors, trained doctors,
[Guest]: and India can do it more cheaply compared to most other countries, we can supply doctors
[Guest]: everywhere. And we can solve, we can bring down medical costs in the United States if
[Guest]: we get our medical education policy right.
[Amit Varma]: We can send homeopaths to Pakistan to perform abortions, sir.
[Guest]: Yes, that's probably we can do now.
[Amit Varma]: So what in a utopian world where there's no opposition at all in the political economy
[Amit Varma]: is bowing down to you, what would be your policy recommendation? What would you do?
[Guest]: Okay, so for what it's worth, this is a hard problem, right? Healthcare does not lend itself
[Guest]: to a complete free market very easily. Because contestability is a big issue. And without
[Guest]: contestability markets, you know, struggle to work.
[Guest]: Can you explain contestability?
[Guest]: So you go in saying that you have a cough and mild fever. One doctor says, oh, you have
[Guest]: nothing, you just take good bed rest, stay at home for a day. Another doctor says, no,
[Guest]: no, no, you need to go for these three tests, that this person, this diagnostic center who
[Guest]: will give me money, you have to go get those tests done. And I'll do all these expensive
[Guest]: things, right? And you as a patient, have no idea which doctor is better. So you need
[Guest]: some form of mechanisms to sort of intervene over here.
[Amit Varma]: What kind of mechanisms exist in more advanced markets where the market is allowed to operate?
[Guest]: So the first thing is, you do need a body of doctors to sort of prescribe standards
[Guest]: for medical education, right? What should people know before they get into medical school?
[Guest]: What should they know after they get into medical school? What kind of exams should
[Guest]: they go through? And this needs to be continuously updated, right? Because science is rapidly
[Guest]: improving.
[Guest]: But you probably need something. So I'll tell you what India is trying to do. There is a
[Guest]: bill that's been put out by the Niti Aayog, a draft about how the Medical Council has
[Guest]: to go. And this has happened because of some really giant scams in the last few years,
[Guest]: which were inevitable when all the conditions were set in. So what they say is they want
[Guest]: to get it back to the government. So the current solution, which I still think if they do it
[Guest]: even half right is better than what it is right now, is create independent boards. These
[Guest]: are not elected doctors, but they'll have, you know, doctor appointees, you will have
[Guest]: sort of bureaucrat appointees. And the idea is also to separate functions, right? So you
[Guest]: want to have a Medical Council overall, but then you want to have a separate accreditation
[Guest]: board, right?
[Guest]: So these guys will just take care of, you know, approving licenses for medical colleges.
[Guest]: But even over there, I'll tell you, the way government policy happens is so silly. They
[Guest]: want to say, oh, there should be adequate financial resources of any medical school
[Guest]: that comes in. Why is that a criteria? So I think they should only see if equipment
[Guest]: facilities, doctors and teachers are well trained, and maybe you should do random inspections
[Guest]: a few things, but they should not have power to impose penalties themselves. They can only
[Guest]: report, right? So the idea is to separate functions in a big way, and probably provide
[Guest]: regulatory competition. So the current idea that's been envisaged in this new draft is
[Guest]: you have this accreditation board, and there are state level boards, and they delegate
[Guest]: a bunch of the powers to the state level. So this is automatically better because different
[Guest]: states can experiment with different ideas. And then over time, the ideas, the best ideas
[Guest]: sort of bubble up, right? So competition always, even at the regulatory level can provide interesting
[Guest]: outcomes. But even here, you have a local monopoly, right? There's only that state board
[Guest]: in that state. So instead, supposing we had, you know, the Medical Board of India A and
[Guest]: the Medical Board of India B, and both of them had jurisdiction across the country,
[Guest]: and you were a qualified doctor, and you were a qualified medical college, if you got approved
[Guest]: by either of them, then they don't have as much of an incentive to seek rent, because
[Guest]: automatically colleges will go to the player who is seeking less rent, right? So I would
[Guest]: say some form of intelligent regulatory competition, which does not involve elected bodies of doctors,
[Guest]: you know, is sort of an improvement over the status quo. And I think it's a complex enough
[Guest]: field that it's, I would hesitate to provide one solution, which I think will work. I think
[Guest]: we need to do these. I mean, it's, I remember my economics professor telling me it's not
[Guest]: about good or bad. It's about better or worse, right? So let's get better with this. And
[Guest]: then let's keep tinkering as to what improves, rather than have one Medical Council of India,
[Guest]: which was set up in 1993, which now may finally meet its end.
[Amit Varma]: Right. And what are the obstacles within the political economy to these reforms taking
[Guest]: place? The biggest thing is, currently, the private
[Guest]: medical colleges are run by individuals and groups which have a good amount of political
[Guest]: power, and they're able to seek a lot of rent. So any changes in this will affect how much
[Guest]: rent they are seeking from the economy, right? So there is some immense opposition. The good
[Guest]: news over there is if the union government intervenes, most of this rent takes place
[Guest]: at the state level. So arguably, an union level intervention could be blind to some
[Guest]: of these considerations. But unless they manage this intelligently, they might pass the law
[Guest]: and the states may not implement anything, right? The other thing is the old mentality
[Guest]: of oh, the state will provide this, right? And there is intellectual support for this,
[Guest]: which is the most troubling, right? If it was only the government saying this and intellectual
[Guest]: support was against it, the game would be different. But there's intellectual cover
[Guest]: being provided for why the state knows best. That is a mindset, and it's also power, right?
[Guest]: So you have departments with immense power, immense budgetary power. And supposing you
[Guest]: only have private medical colleges, or you only do financing, right? You don't do sort
[Guest]: of you don't manage them as line department, then power is immensely reduced for those
[Guest]: who are sitting in those departments. So they have a strong interest against this, right?
[Guest]: So but these are problems that are not insurmountable. I mean, people wait for the right crisis,
[Guest]: right? A crisis is always an opportunity.
[Amit Varma]: But do we need a crisis for change to happen?
[Guest]: I hope not. Well, for what it's worth, I'm quite happy that in 2009, there was a government
[Guest]: committee called the Yashpal committee, which we sort of looked at this and gave fairly
[Guest]: sensible suggestions along the lines that we discussed. In 2011, the previous government
[Guest]: tried to pass the new bill, it somehow didn't go through. Now the Niti Aayog has a draft
[Guest]: out. So hopefully, when this demonetization fracas gets over, I have no idea when it will.
[Amit Varma]: If people still have money to go to doctors.
[Guest]: Yes. And if people still have money to pay for their kids medical education, hopefully
[Guest]: we expect something in the next year.
[Amit Varma]: Awesome. It was great talking to you Pawan. Thank you so much.
[Amit Varma]: My pleasure.
[Amit Varma]: It's sad how often good intentions lead to bad outcomes. The state of health care is
[Amit Varma]: abysmal in India, and the Medical Council of India might actually be a contributor to
[Amit Varma]: its ill health. There is an old proverb here that is quite apt. Physician, heal thyself.
[Amit Varma]: The physician here, of course, is the Indian government, which is about as competent in
[Amit Varma]: governance as 18th century physicians were in treating disease. Back then, bloodletting
[Amit Varma]: was a common remedy for many diseases. Today, we know is usually just harmful, but our governments
[Amit Varma]: keep bleeding us. On that cheerful note, see you next week.
[Unknown]: Next week on The Scene and the Unseen, Amit Verma will be talking to Parth Shah about
[Unknown]: profit motive in education. For more, go to sceneunseen.in.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to The Scene and the Unseen, check out another hit show from
[Amit Varma]: Indusworks Media Networks, Cyrus Says, which is hosted by my old colleague from MTV, Cyrus
[Amit Varma]: Brocha. You can download it on iTunes or any other podcasting network.
[Unknown]: Hi, this is Amit Doshi, and I wanted to thank each and every one of our listeners. It's
[Unknown]: been two years since I founded IVM, and it's been an amazing two years. We wanted to learn
[Unknown]: a little bit more about who is listening to our shows, and so we put together a short
[Unknown]: survey. The survey is anonymous, and we aren't going to be collecting any personal information.
[Unknown]: I would really appreciate it if you could take a couple of minutes out of your day and
[Unknown]: go to ivmpodcast.com slash survey and fill it out. Thanks, and please keep listening.
[Unknown]: Hey, man, just help me out, man. I need some podcast, man. I haven't had a fix in a week.
[Unknown]: I need some. Don't you worry about it. I got podcasts galore for you, man. Just go to ivmpodcast.com.
[Unknown]: You can also find us on Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram. Thanks, man. I'm going to check
[Unknown]: it out.